In 1982, the Dutch physicist and sound artist, Felix Hess, began producing sound installations based on frogs, whose entrancing song he first encountered in the hillsides of Adelaide in Australia. On returning to the Netherlands, he began developing robotic frogs, each outfitted with a microphone, speaker, and circuitry, enabling them to listen for and recognize each other to produce choruses like those he first heard in Australia.

The project I propose is to translate Felix's original work with frog-robots into a web-app, allowing a group of participants to summon their own frog chorus using their phones, making algorithm audible. This work is intended to exist partly as social performance - a single phone running the app will make very little sound on its own. Instead, when a group of people each run this app on their phones together, what will emerge is a dynamic, ad-hoc sound environment that is spatially distributed and self-interacting. In having each phone as a frog within the chorus, the participant-listeners are invited to put their phones down and join in an exercise of active listening as they walk around their phones as ephemeral sound sculpture.

While remaining faithful to Felix's original work, this project extends it with a critique of what it means to live in a world increasingly of machines talking to each other. In nature, frog behavior can by characterized by phonotaxis (the movement of an organism with respect to sound), which I take as a poetic metaphor for how we might navigate algorithmically-governed environments. In an age where machines more convincingly give an impression of aliveness, the simple act of listening may serve as an act of resistance, a place from which to understand how our own aliveness is not like that of a machine.