In 1982, the Dutch physicist and sound artist, Felix Hess, began producing sound installations based on frogs, whose entrancing song he first encountered in the hillsides of Adelaide in Australia. On returning to the Netherlands, he began developing frog-robots, each outfitted with a microphone, speaker, and circuitry, enabling them to listen for and sing to each other to produce choruses of frog-song like those he had heard in Australia.

The project I propose is to translate Felix's original work with frog-robots into a web-app, allowing a group of participants to summon their own frog chorus using their mobile devices, an act of making algorithm audible. This work is intended to exist partly as performance - a single phone running the app will make very little sound on its own. Instead, when a group of people runs this app on their phones together, what will emerge is a dynamic and responsive sound environment that is spatially distributed and self-interacting. In having each phone as a frog within the chorus, the participant-listeners are invited to put their phones down and join in an exercise of active listening as they walk around their phones as ephemeral sound sculpture. While participants will require internet access in order to load the app in the browser, no other networking protocols (e.g. bluetooth or websockets) will be used to facilitate interation; these devices will interact only acoustically.

----
<section style="margin: 20px 30px">
<h4>Suggestion for a listening-performance</h4>
In a gathering of five or more people (ideally, many more) with smartphones running the app in a browser, consider the following actions.

- Walk in a slow, undirected manner with your phone (frog) until you find a good place to set it down.
- Notice how the other participants are setting down their phones (frogs) too, and remain quiet as the frogs (phones) settle into their environment, slowly beginning to make their calls.
- Focus on the sound of your frog, apart from the other frogs. Wander further away from your frog, until you can no longer distinguish which which frog is yours.
- Consider what it feels like to be separated from your frog (phone), witnessing it absorbed in the act of listening and singing?
- After a while, leave the frog chorus, either bringing your phone with you, or not.
</section>

----

While the idea for this project originally occurred to me nearly a decade ago, I was saddened to learn of [Felix's passing late last year](https://www.aviationanalysis.net/physicist-and-installation-artist-felix-hess-81-has-died/), and I had the realization that I have been sitting on this project for too long. His body of work is one that I've found inspiring for many years, and unfortunately seems to be little known within the larger arc of post-war European sound art, and even within his native country of the Netherlands.

But while remaining faithful to Felix's original work, this project also aims to extend it with an investigation of what it means to live in a world increasingly of machines talking to each other. In nature, frog behavior can by characterized by [phonotaxis](https://www.oxfordreference.com/display/10.1093/oi/authority.20110803100323792;jsessionid=B3CD8ED4F256F338961508B97BB9BD3E#:~:text=The%20movement%20of%20an%20organism,predator%20(i.e.%20negative%20phonotaxis).) (the movement of an organism with respect to sound), which I take as a poetic metaphor for how we might navigate algorithmically-determined environments. In an age where machines give increasingly convincing impressions of "aliveness", the simple act of listening may serve as an act of resistance, a place from which to understand how our own aliveness is not like that of a machine. To give a clearer voice to the intentions, aims, and historical context of this project, I would also like to write an informal essay that attempts to connect Felix's work to current discourses around sound art, deep listening, embodied perception, and technology.

This project is also imagined to be the first phase of a larger project that explores the usage of smartphone devices for algorithmically-based composition and listening. Ultimately, I would like to build a platform that allows contributors to compose music for this sort of system, in which a number of smartphones within acoustic proximity respond to each other sonically. This system is also inherently limited by the quality of the built-in speaker and microphone, which is acoustically low-tech relative to now standard consumer products developed for music listening (like Bluetooth speakers). However, my hope is that the listening experience is heightened by the social component of a shared listening experience, which may be a helpful reminder to audiences that the hermetic listening practices fostered by the likes of Spotify and virtual reality cannot presume to circumscribe all of what it means for us to listen, to, and with our devices.